\pagenumbering{arabic}
\setcounter{page}{1}

# Introduction

## Motivation

Earth observation (EO) satellites have been producing diverse and consistent datasets providing valuable information about the Earth's surface for multiple decades now. This continuously growing volume of data and its derived products support the assessment and monitoring of global policy frameworks, such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals [@Anderson2017], contribute to the climate data records of several Essential Climate Variables [@Hollmann2013] and assist decision makers in the sustainable use of Earth's resources [@Eckman2012].

The accessibility to an extensive volume of EO data has increased continuously, which can be emphasized with two of the most important satellite data archives: the Landsat program by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the United States Geological Survey (USGS), and the Copernicus program by the European Commission and the European Space Agency (ESA). A free and open access policy for all data produced by the Copernicus program has been agreed upon before the launch of the first Sentinel satellite in 2014 [@EuropeanCommission2013]. The decision for such an access policy has been reinforced by reports that forecast significant positive impacts in various socioeconomic areas of the European Union [@PwC2019]. Access to the Landsat archive, with some datasets starting as early as 1972, was facilitated by a change to an open data policy in 2009. The policy change subsequently resulted in a significant increase in usage as well as scientific and public value of the data [@Wulder2012; @Zhu2019].

As petabytes of EO and other geospatial data have become available, the term *big Earth data* has been designated and discussions about associated opportunities and challenges have been started [@Guo2016; @Boulton2018]. Challenges related to big data in general have been characterized as *Volume, Velocity and Variety* [@Laney2001], which has also been adapted in regard to big Earth data and EO data in particular: “Volume (e.g., data volumes have increased by 10 in the last 5 years); Velocity (e.g., Sentinel-2 is capturing a new image of a given place every 5 days); and Variety (e.g., different type of sensors, spatial/spectral resolutions)” [@Giuliani2019a, p. 1]. This concept of big data challenges has been extended even further by adding the veracity [@Saha2014] (i.e., concerning data quality) and value of data [@Sudmanns2020].

These challenges inhibit the full potential of the data to be exploited by the average user, especially when many still rely on the traditional approach of downloading and processing the data on a local system. Even for small spatial scales, limitations in file storage and computing resources can render the analysis of EO time-series impracticable.

In the past few years, a demand for new and innovative technological solutions has promoted the emergence of various platforms that not only provide access to open and commercial EO data repositories, but also offer processing capabilities via cloud-based infrastructures. Notable examples include Google Earth Engine (GEE) [@Gorelick2017], the JRC Earth Observation Data and Processing Platform (JEODPP) [@Soille2018] and Sentinel Hub [@Sinergise]. All of these cloud-based management and analysis platforms can represent viable alternatives to the traditional data-centric approach. However, no one-fits-all solution exists and the fact that most platforms either rely on proprietary, closed-source software or necessitate the purchase of storage space and processing resources, can be an important drawback for some user groups.

Another innovative solution that gained popularity among the EO community in recent years is the Open Data Cube (ODC). This open-source software library facilitates the management and analysis of large volumes of EO data and can be deployed on a variety of systems, like High Performance Computing (HPC) systems or cloud environments. The project is supported by various institutions such as Geoscience Australia, the USGS, and the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) [@Killough2018]. 

Earth Observation Data Cubes (EODC) based on the ODC software have been successfully deployed for several regions around the world, such as Australia [@Lewis2017], Switzerland [@Giuliani2017], Catalonia (Spain) [@Maso2019] and Colombia [@Bravo2017]. These national and regional EODCs enable researchers and decision makers to efficiently retrieve information from large EO datasets, while being in control of their own data management and analysis platform. Furthermore, they facilitate the implementation and development of new methodologies for analysis and can be used to present scientific results to the public [e.g., @DEA2021]. 

@Giuliani2017 identified data access and data preparation as two major challenges for the implementation of EODCs, both of which regard the generation of Analysis Ready Data (ARD). EO data that has been processed and organized to a minimum set of requirements (e.g., radiometric, atmospheric and geometric corrections) to enable immediate analysis without additional effort, is considered ARD [@Lewis2018]. While large volumes of EO data are freely available from data producers, the provision of ARD products that do not necessitate additional processing, is currently lacking behind. As a result, many EODC creators still rely on their own processing approaches [e.g., @Giuliani2018; @Ticehurst2019]. New software tools have emerged in recent years that strive to fill this gap and offer a solution to generate ARD independently [@Frantz2019; @Truckenbrodt2019]. However, no software tool exists at the moment that can single-handedly gather EO data from different sensor types for a region of interest, apply the necessary processing steps to create ARD products, and finally prepares the products to be used concurrently in a single EODC.

The implementation of EODCs to analyze EO data of large volume and variety, not only has great potential on national but also on smaller spatial scales. The process of policy- and decision-making in federal states can directly benefit from EO derived information. @Giuliani2020, for example, have demonstrated how EODCs can support environmental monitoring at local and national scales through the production of Essential Variables, which describe the evolution of various Earth system components. 

For the Free State of Thuringia in Germany, forest ecosystems play an important role and are particularly subjected to climate related impacts [@Frischbier2013]. Severe droughts, as experienced by Central Europe in 2003 and 2018, have caused unprecedented tree mortality, not only through heat stress but also secondary effects like forest fires and insect attacks [@Schuldt2020; @Senf2020]. A climate bill was enacted in 2018, which includes goals for the adaptation and mitigation of climate related impacts [@TH2018] and could be supported by information derived from an EODC. 

The importance of measures that try to alleviate the impacts of a forthcoming climate crisis will continuously grow in the near future. Extreme weather, climate action failure, and human environmental damage were identified by the World Economic Forum (WEF) as major global risks, both in terms of impact and likelihood [@WEF2021a]. The damage caused by extreme weather events, for example, has increased in recent decades across Europe [@Kron2019], and by the year 2100 about two-thirds of the European population could be affected annually by weather-related disasters, such as heatwaves [@Forzieri2017].

The extensive volume of data from EO satellites already help in better understanding complex natural systems, including the challenges they face and the consequences of human interactions [e.g., @AraujoBarbosa2015]. To continuously derive more valuable information from the data and to make the process itself more efficient, however, further exploration of novel data management and analysis methods is necessary.



## Objectives & Structure

As emphasized in Section @sec:motivation, EODCs also have a lot of potential on smaller spatial scales. Therefore, the main objective of this thesis is to implement an EODC for the German Free State of Thuringia — the Thuringian Data Cube (TDC). The functionality and usability on a local HPC system is tested with two use cases, one of which relates to possible drought impacts in the Roda forest. A second objective is the creation of a suitable software tool that uses existing open-source software to cover all aspects necessary for the technical implementation. Additional motivations in regard to the development of such a tool are the usability for others and the facilitation of reproducibility. In summary and also in practical order, the objectives of this thesis are:

- Development of a software tool that facilitates all necessary steps for the creation of an EODC on a local HPC system.
- Implementation of the TDC by utilizing the developed tool.
- Assessment of functionality and possible improvements, both in regard to the tool and the TDC implementation. 
- Demonstration of the usage and potential of the TDC through use cases.

The structure is as follows: Chapter @sec:state-of-the-art provides an overview of current literature in regard to the main topics that are covered throughout this thesis, namely Analysis Ready Data and Earth Observation Data Cubes. Chapter @sec:technical-development describes the development of the software project and all utilized components. The implementation in the form of an EODC for the Free State of Thuringia and demonstrations of its functionality and usage are covered in Chapter @sec:thuringian-data-cube. The results are discussed in Chapter @sec:discussion, both in regard to the developed software tool and the implementation of the TDC. Finally, Chapter @sec:conclusion concludes the thesis.
