# Conclusion

The Thuringian Data Cube has successfully been implemented on the HPC system of the Department of Earth Observation at the Friedrich Schiller University Jena. This initial implementation includes EO data in an analysis-ready format from the optical satellites Landsat 8 and Sentinel-2A/B, as well as the SAR satellites Sentinel-1A/B, for a three-year period.      

The implementation of the TDC was facilitated by the development of the ARDCube tool, which enables the management of multiple workflows that are necessary to create an operational EODC. The tool covers the download of EO datasets, the processing of said datasets to ARD products organized in a non-overlapping grid system, and finally, the preparation of the ARD products to be managed and accessed through the Open Data Cube software library. Furthermore, the usage of open-source software components that are encapsulated as Singularity containers, eases the setup process, enables the usage on HPC systems, and supports the principle of open and reproducible science.      

Two use cases were performed that not only helped in assessing the general usability of the TDC implementation, but also in demonstrating the potential of performing small- and large-scale analyses with the integrated ARD products, as well as available open-source Python tools. The large-scale computations of per-pixel observations were primarily intended to identify any possible issues regarding the ARD products and the technical setup in general. The results of the computations, however, also provide additional, valuable information for subsequent analyses performed with the TDC. The smaller-scale Roda forest analysis, on the other hand, was carried out to demonstrate a time-series analysis that involves all available ARD products. At the same time, the prevailing issue of drought related impacts on forest ecosystems in the region could be studied, and has opened up the possibility of follow-up analyses to further investigate various features that were observed in the results. 

Both the ARDCube tool and the TDC can be further improved and extended. The ARDCube tool, for example, offers the potential to create a thoroughly reproducible workflow that includes all aspects of the creation of EODCs and any subsequent analysis. The current implementation of the TDC, on the other hand, could be optimized and extended in a variety of aspects despite already being a capable and operational system. This includes the general accessibility of the TDC on the HPC system and more specifically the extension of the ARD products in terms of temporal extent, variety of optical and SAR sensors, as well as the addition of ancillary data products. Furthermore, current advancements related to the organization and access of large volumes of EO data and its metadata, such as STAC and Pangeo, could offer viable alternatives to the current approach of using the ODC and should be further explored and compared.

In conclusion, the initial implementation of an Earth Observation Data Cube for the Free State of Thuringia successfully establishes a foundation for the efficient management and analysis of EO data that is characterized by various challenges inherent to big Earth data (e.g., volume, velocity, and variety). A thriving ecosystem of related open-source software projects facilitates the development of new and innovative analysis methods that can be performed at large scales, covering the entire spatial and temporal extents available. Valuable information can thereby be extracted from the EO data, which helps in better understanding a variety of Earth system components and can ultimately support the adaptation and mitigation of climate related impacts that will most likely continue to gain importance in the future.
